---
title: ROM Hacking 101 altering strings
author: Etienne Millon
tags: romhack
---

I started using console emulator in the 90s. ROMs were small, and emulators were
free, so it was a easy way to play games. This had an additional benefit: some
people on the internet released fan translations of games that were never
released outside of Japan. At that time, I was also interested in playing (in
French) games that were not released in Europe. That's how I could play games
like Seiken Densetsu 3 or Chrono Trigger.

This whole "I will translate a game made years ago for a console" business
fascinated me. How do these people do? I dived into this world and I learnt a
lot about this process.

Most people know that computers only manipulate numbers. So, in order to
manipulate characters such as 'H' or '!' it is somehow necessary to have a way
to transform characters to numbers. This is called an encoding. Normal programs
use ASCII, where 'H' is 72 and '!' is 33. That is just a convention, there is no
particular meaning to these numbers. They have a couple nice properties, for
example that 'I' comes just after 'H', as in the alphabet, but that's not
strictly needed (for example in EBCDIC 'i' is 137 and 'j' is 145).

Most console games of this period didn't use ASCII. They used an ad-hoc
encoding. The reason of this is that they fonts take a lot of memory. So if your
game does not use the character '%', it makes no sense to include its picture,
or glyph, in the cartridge. A "good" character encoding would just index the
graphic memory, and it makes no sense to include a hole in it. So characters are
shifted.

So, how to find this encoding? It is possible to look for existing strings using
the fact that the same character will be translated to the same number. For
example, one character says "it is expensive" in the game. This means that in
the ROM file there should be a substring of the form "ABCADCEFGEHDAIE", where
the capital letters are unknown, but always the same. Viewed from this angle,
this problem is like an elaborate crossword problem.

    it is expensive
    ABCADCEFGEHDAIE

This string is a good candidate, because it is quite long (15 characters) but
contains relatively few different characters (9). If a candidate string is too
small, there will be a lot of matches. If all the characters are different,
there will be a lot of matches too because several substitutions are possible at
different places in the file.

Let's write a function that looks for these kind of patterns.

~~~~ {.python}
def sublists(l, n):
    """
    Get sublists of length n, with the index they start at.

    >>> [(i, list(g)) for (i, g) in sublists(range(5), 3)]
    [(0, [0, 1, 2]), (1, [1, 2, 3]), (2, [2, 3, 4])]
    """
    for i in range(len(l) - n + 1):
        yield (i, l[i:i + n])


def unique(d):
    """
    Check if a dictionary is invertible.

    >>> unique({})
    True

    >>> unique({'a': 'b', 'c': 'b'})
    False

    >>> unique({'a': 'b', 'c': 'd'})
    True
    """
    vs = set(d.values())
    return len(d) == len(vs)


def find_all(pattern, f):
    """
    >>> find_all('abab', b'\x01\x02\x01\x02\x03\x04\x05\x04\x05')
    [(0, {1: 'a', 2: 'b'}), (5, {4: 'a', 5: 'b'})]
    """
    n = len(pattern)
    candidates = [(i, match(pattern, l)) for (i, l) in sublists(f, n)]
    return [(i, c) for (i, c) in candidates if c is not None]


def match(pattern, l):
    """
    >>> match('abcd', b'\x01\x02\x03\x04')
    {1: 'a', 2: 'b', 3: 'c', 4: 'd'}

    >>> match('ttet', b'\x01\x03\x02\x01')

    >>> match('test', b'\x01\x03\x02\x01')
    {1: 't', 2: 's', 3: 'e'}
    """
    d = {}
    for key, c in zip(pattern, l):
        in_dict = d.get(c)
        if in_dict is None:
            d[c] = key
        elif in_dict != key:
            return None
    if unique(d):
        return d
    else:
        return None
~~~~

Every time we encounter a character, three things can happen:

  - it's a new character: add it to the dictionary being built
  - the character has already been seen with another value: it's an error
  - the character has already been seen with the same value: do nothing.

This algorithm is not optimal for several reasons:

  - first, we generate a list of sublists and iterate on it. This makes the
    function O(|pattern|.|file|), ie quadratic. Using a variant of Boyer-Moore
    search, it is possible to reduce this complexity.
  - then, we have to check whether the mapping is unique. Instead of a
    dictionary, we actually would need a bidirectional map, that would by
    construction always be bijective[^BiMapDeception].

[^BiMapDeception]:
This data structure is actually quite deceiving, as it's
merely one map for each direction.

Here is the output of the `find_all` function on the Pilotwings ROM:

    (110989, {98: 's', 99: 't', 68: 'e', 101: 'v', 103: 'x', 72: 'i', 79: 'p', 77:
    'n', 239: ' '})

That is to say, 'e' is encoded as 68, etc. Let's write another function that
applies this encoding in reverse (yep, decoding) to the ROM, and writes a dot
when the letter is unknown. Here is the output near our target string:

    ...e ..  .ppe...n.e... neve.         expe.te. ... t. .. s. .e.......            
     ... s..... n.t  ..ve ..ne t.e.e...t see.e. t.    .e ..st . .itt.e.i..i...t....n
    se.ve ..e..  ..n.t ... .n..  it is expensive..... ...ppe. t.. ..st. ....ine   s.
    i.in. ...n    . ...p..  .... .in.s      ..nn.t t....    t.e ....n....eep t.e n.s
    e .pin t.e .i.. n.t ....in. .n t.e  ....n.......in. is ...e st.i.t .n t.e   .e.t

We can already make several observations:

    - We can see parts of words ("never", "expected", etc), which means that
      this is going well.
    - Looking at the file, the text only seems to be located between offsets
      0x19780 and 0x1cf00.
    - It seems that the letters are encoded in a sequential fashion, as in
      ASCII.

So, let's modify the encoding to add all the letters between 'i' (72) and 'p'
(79). This works well:

    19a80 pe..e.tt.e skills ne.ess... .o..o.  to  e..n   .e.ti.i..tion....
    1a400 .in....omplete lesson in .n.e. ....   .o. .. .oints...o... . .in

However, it can not be continued: the gaps between 'e' and 'i', or 'p' and 's'
are too big. Usually this means that in the font, the letters are not in
sequence, but rather organized as a matrix.

The next step is to guess several other letters by completing words. For
example, "sk..ivin." is probably "skydiving". Then, using a similar technique,
we can also find capital letters and arrive at this table:

        x0 x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 x6 x7 x8 x9 xA xB xC xD xE xF
    0x   A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P
    1x   Q  R  S  T  U  V  W  X  Y  Z
    2x                                    ,  !  ?
    3x
    4x   a  b  c  d  e  f  g  h  i  j  k  l  m  n  o  p
    5x
    6x   q  r  s  t  u  v  w  x  y  z           '
    7x
    8x
    9x
    Ax                     -
    Bx
    Cx
    Dx
    Ex                                               <spc>
    Fx

It is enough to extract all the text from the game. Interestingly enough, we can
also open the ROM (I used Tile Layer Pro, which is unfortunately for Windows)
and find the same layout:

![TLPPalette]

[TLPPalette]: /drafts/dte/palette.png
