---
author: Etienne Millon
---

The freeze is coming.
It's a good time to make a bit of summary of my contributions during this
release cycle.

## New packages

[subliminal] is a tool to automatically download subtitles for movie files.
Packaging it required to also package a few of its dependencies that were not
available in Debian: [babelfish], [enzyme], [guessit], and [pysrt].

[glyr] is a library to query lyrics sites. I packaged it because the new
version of gmpc requires it, but at the moment it is just a leaf package.

## Usual work on my packages

[gmpc] and [gmpc-plugins] did not change a lot. Upstream is working on a big new
version but it is not released yet. During this Debian cycle, I did mostly
janitorial work: I disabled outdated provider plugins, enable multi-arch
support, and ported to a recent version of Vala.

[rss2email] got a new upstream maintainer. This is really great since the code
needed some love. The whole program got rewritten in Python 3, and this mandated
a major version bump, creating the rss2email 3.x branch.

One of the side-effects of this rewrite is that the configuration file format
changed. Actually the 2.x version used a plain python file for configuration,
which was `eval()`uated within the program's context. Now it is based on
ConfigParser. The on-disk state file, which serializes what feeds you are
subscribed to, and what is the last time you refreshed them, changed its format
too from a pickle file to a JSON file.

This incompatibility is necessary and welcome, but is tough to manage within the
context of a software distribution. If a user upgrades his packages, he should
find his programs working as before. So, I wrote a `r2e-migrate` script that
converts a 2.x state file to a 3.x state file. Designing a clean upgrade path
was very interesting. Indeed, it is not possible to do this during the package
installation: since the config and state files are in every user's $HOME, it is
necessary to wait for each user to do his migration. The solution I arrived at
was that when rss2email 3.x starts, and has no state file, it checks if a
rss2email 2.x exists. Then it prompts the user to run `r2e-migrate`. A few
iterations were necessary before it worked as I wanted, so I am happy to have
used the experimental suite for this. Once everything was working I uploaded the
package to unstable and it seems to work well. I am very happy with how this
went, and I could close a lot of bugs in this package, also thanks to the new
responsive upstream.

[visualboyadvance] only got cosmetic changes. A patch for fixing the build with
the new GCC flags, enabling hardening etc. I somehow missed the notification
email for an important bug (#740292) that I merged but unfortunately it is too
late to include it in Jessie. I would like to give the package more love for the
next release, maybe including the newer vba-m version.

[zsnes] is an interesting package to maintain because it's written in x86
assembly and has been dormant upstream for a few years now. During this release
cycle there were no real breakthroughs, but a lot of little niceties. For
example, we now have a debug package, and build packages for kfreebsd and the
hurd. Enabling hardening options also made us discover several memory
manipulation errors.

I would like to include a more recent upstream snapshot, but the whole situation
seems to be a little complicated as there seem to be several forks lying around.

## New packages I'm taking care of

I have the pleasure of being the new maintainer for [feedparser], a Python
library for parsing RSS and Atom feeds. It is my most popular package: according
to popcon, 40% of users have it installed! During this released, I ported back
the work made on the Ubuntu, and worked on providing a Python 3 version of this
package.

## Given package

In 2012 I started to take care of the coin* packages. I adopted [coinor-cbc] and
began to plan a transition plan for all the related packages, but because of a
lack of time and interest I did not go all the way.

Fortunately Miles Lubin proposed to adopt these packages and is doing a great
work on them. Thanks Miles!

## Incomplete work

I wanted to package several programs that did not make it to the archive.

[brogue] is a rogue-like in the most traditional fashion: grid-based and turn by
turn. Most of the packaging work I did was on an unpackaged dependency,
[libtcod]. It needed a bit of work so that it can be used installed in `/usr`
and not from an unpacked source tree.

[opentyrian] is a free rewrite of the classic shoot-em-up Tyrian. As usual for
this kind of projects, it only covers the software part. You still need a copy
of the original game to play. In that case it is easier since the game can be
downloaded from the author's website. But since it is not free, Debian can not
host these files. So it is necessary to download it at install time using a tool
named `game-data-packager`. I worked with Alexandre Detiste on a patch to
support this ([#739486]), but unfortunately the project seems dormant and it is
blocking for the inclusion of opentyrian in Debian.

[stepmania] is an open source clone of the "Dance Dance Revolution" game. It is
a very popular piece of software, and an Intend To Package bug has been open for
it since 2003. But it used to include non-free (and actually,
copyright-infringing) pieces of artwork from the original game, which used to
make it unsuitable for inclusion. However the newer versions are more compliant
and I am still working on this. There are two problems remaining: first, there
is a lot of code and artwork for which the copyright and licensing information
is unclear (though it does seem that the infringing material has been removed).
And second, it embeds a lot of libraries; it's necessary to patch it so that it
can use the system copies. I sincerely hope that it will be part of Jessie+1
since I could not deliver it for Jessie.

## Debian Maintainer

TODO
