---
title: Resizing a LVM partition
author: Etienne Millon
tags: linux, lvm
---

I like to have `/home` on a separate partition. But sometimes it can backfire.
If your root partition is full, you don't have a lot of solutions. In
particular, I found that debian-installer's "automatic partitioning" sometimes
creates very small root partitions. If you want to install big packages (ghc,
eclipse, libreoffice, …), 16G is not enough.

In the past, filesystems were sitting on directly on top of partitions. It means
that it's very difficult to change their size.

Modern systems (post-1998) can use [LVM], which is a layer between filesystems
and partitions. One of its advantages is that you can resize logical volumes (a
LV is the virtual device node where the filesystem sits) after they have been
created.

@@@@ { display: block; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; }
    [box/.style={draw}
    ,fs/.style={box, minimum height=1cm}
    ,part/.style={box, minimum height=1.8cm, yshift=-3mm}
    ,disk/.style={box, minimum height=2.8cm, yshift=-4mm}
    ]

    \def\colpart{blue!10}
    \def\colfs{red!10}
    \def\coldisk{green!10}
    \node[fs, minimum width=1cm]             (RF) {/};
    \node[fs, minimum width=4cm, right of=RF, anchor=west, node distance=8mm ]     (HF) {/home};

    \node[part, minimum width=1.2cm] at (RF) (RP) {};
    \node[part, minimum width=4.2cm] at (HF) (HP) {};
    \node[yshift=2ex] at (RP.south) {sda1};
    \node[yshift=2ex] at (HP.south) {sda2};

    \node[disk, minimum width=5.7cm] at ($ (RP.west)!0.5!(HP.east) $) (D) {};
    \node[yshift=2ex] at (D.south) {sda};
@@@@

To resize the `/` and `/home` filesystems, it is necessary to change the change
the size of both the filesystems and the LVs. But it is not possible to do it in
any order: at any time, the filesystem must be smaller than its LV. So, the
correct order of operations is:

  - shrink home filesystem
  - shrink home LV
  - expand root LV
  - expand root filesystem

Wait a second before you start reaching for your favorite live CD: all these
operations can be done online. Actually, the two first ones need `/home` to be
unmounted, so it has to be done in single user mode. Online expansion of the
root file system is fairly new (it's from Linux 3.3, 2012) but it works like a
charm.

Manipulating partition and volume sizes are always a bit tricky. Sometimes you
have to give sizes in blocks, sometimes in bytes. Sometimes it's multiples of
1000 and sometimes it's multiples of 1024. I would not feel comfortable after
typing 4 commands with 4 sizes. Fortunately, LVM tools are wonderful and can
"talk" to the underlying filesystem (using [fsadm]). And LVM knows how much
space is free, so it can expand a partition to fill completely the disk (or more
precisely the volume group).

In a nutshell, this complex operation can be done in two commands:

~~~~ {.bash}
lvresize -r -L 800G /dev/mapper/machine-home
lvresize -r -l '+100%FREE' /dev/mapper/machine-root
~~~~

The `-r` switch enables [fsadm]. `-L` indicates the new size in terms of bytes,
and `-l` in terms of LVM units.

[LVM]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logical_Volume_Manager_(Linux)
[fsadm]: http://linux.die.net/man/8/fsadm
