---
title: Our YC W13 experience
author: Etienne Millon
tags: yc, cloverfeed
---

Y Combinator is a seed accelerator for startups located in San Francisco Bay
Area. Put simply, the Bay Area is the best place to start a technology startup
and YC is the best accelerator there.

Since 2010, I have been working on and off with my friend [Gabriel Synnaeve] on
a product that could become a company. The idea is that we receive data everyday
from a lot of sources, and a lot are not directly relevant to you. Our goal is
to aggregate this feeds and sort them according to how likely you're going to
read them. Our pitch became the following:

> [Cloverfeed] is a website and a mobile application to rank and filter entries
> from all your feeds: RSS, Facebook, Twitter, social news… It's like a spam
> filter and "priority inbox" for all your notifications. With this service, we
> want to empower our users to be more efficient reading their news feeds,
> starting with ourselves.

Doing this would be nice, but was a lot of work. We were both preparing our PhD
and unwilling to jump the boat and work on this full-time, so the idea cooked a
few years.

In August 2012, we saw the usual "apply for YC" announce  on [Hacker News] and
decided to apply. It would mean moving to California in January but by then we
would both have graduated and officially on the job market. The perfect time to
start a company.

Getting into YC is a two-step process. First, you have to fill an application
form that explains who you are, what you are going to work on, and why you'll
succeed. Then, you're invited to present your project at Y Combinator
headquarters in California. If the interview goes well you're invited to work
[at YC] on your product.

### The application

Company Name

:   Cloverfeed

Company url, if any

:   <http://cloverfeed.com>

Phone number(s)

:   snippyhollow        *redacted*
:   emillon             *redacted*

Please enter the url of a 1 minute video introducing the founders. [Instructions.](http://ycombinator.com/video.html)

:   *redacted*

YC usernames of all founders, including you, #{hn_user}, separated by spaces.

:   emillon snippyhollow

YC usernames of all founders, including you, #{hn_user}, who will live in the Bay Area January through March if we fund you.

:   emillon snippyhollow

What is your company going to make?

:   Cloverfeed is a website and a mobile app. A user gets a list of items
    corresponding to what he is most likely to read right now. They are coming
    from their RSS, Facebook, Twitter, and social news (Reddit, HN). It is spam
    filtering and priority inbox for all kinds of feeds.

    The numbers of items that it displays is proportional to how big a reader
    you are. From the user's behavior, we rate how much they liked each piece
    they read. We then rank and filter future readings. Additionally, Cloverfeed
    will present you really interesting pieces of news you could have missed
    with your personal sources. For that, we exploit links between topics and
    links between people.

If this application is a response to a YC RFS, which one? (Options: Ints 1-9)

:   RFS 3: we will use Twitter as a source, on par with other data sources
    (RSS, social news) though, not focused solely on Twitter.

For each founder, please list: YC username; name; age; year of graduation, school, degree and subject for each degree; email address; personal url, github url, facebook id, twitter id; employer and title (if any) at last job before this startup. Put unfinished degrees in parens. List the main contact first. Separate founders with blank lines. Put an asterisk before the name of anyone **not** able to move to the Bay Area.

:   snippyhollow;
    Gabriel Synnaeve;
    26;
    2012, Grenoble University, PhD in Bayesian modeling (machine learning);
    2009, ENSIMAG, French Engineer in CS and Applied Mathematics;
    2009, Grenoble University and NII (Tokyo, Japan),
          Master in AI and machine learning;
    gabriel.synnaeve@gmail.com;
    <http://syhw.posterous.com/>, <https://github.com/SnippyHolloW/>,
    <http://www.facebook.com/gabriel.synnaeve>, <https://twitter.com/syhw>;
    PhD student at Collège de France (Paris) and INRIA (Grenoble)
    & taught Unix programming, Scheme, and Ocaml at University

    emillon;
    Etienne Millon;
    25;
    (2012, Paris 6 University,
           PhD in static analysis of programs (type systems)),
    2009, ENSIMAG, French Engineer in CS and Applied Mathematics;
    me@emillon.org;
    <http://blog.emillon.org>, <http://github.com/emillon>,
    <https://twitter.com/etiennemillon>;
    EADS, R&D Engineer in Software Security
    & taught Javascript and Ocaml at University

Please tell us in one or two sentences about the most impressive thing other than this startup that each founder has built or achieved.

:   snippyhollow: a StarCraft Broodwar bot aimed to adapt its strategy, able
    to play full games and win > 95% time agains the built-in AI. Parameters of
    the Bayesian models are learnt from pro-gamers' games data, 4th best
    competitive bot in the world.
    <https://github.com/SnippyHolloW/BroodwarBotQ>

:   emillon: I started programming at age 8 on my CPC6128+. I am responsible for
    a dozen Debian packages (this includes derivatives such as Ubuntu): I
    prepare new versions, fix bugs and send patches upstream. Building a binary
    distribution is a technical challenge: you have to make sure that upgrading
    a library won't make it necessary to recompile unrelated packages.
    <http://qa.debian.org/developer.php?login=etienne.millon@gmail.com>

Please tell us about the time you, #{hn_user}, most successfully hacked some (non-computer) system to your advantage.

:   - I helped Stuart Russell (of the "Russell & Norvig: AI a Modern Approach"
      fame) to enroll his kids at school in France, particularly for their
    entrance exams. I like to think that's why he accepted to be on my PhD
    committee.
    - I played WoW competitively (in a top-notch guild) in 2006, while attending
      preparatory classes and through the competitive exams. I scripted bots
    behaviors for farming consumables needed at this level of play, and used the
    simplex algorithm to optimize my spells casting to compensate for lower
    stuff. Had other people in my guild known about it, they probably would have
    reported me. I hacked myself into stopping by selling my account on eBay
    (the same year)!

Please tell us about an interesting project, preferably outside of class or work, that two or more of you created together. Include urls if possible.

:   We developped Finlink, a social networking site specialized in the sectors
    of banking, insurance and finance. We were junior contractors at the time
    (2007-2008). The project was quite challenging because specs were constantly
    changing (that's when we discovered the real world).
    <http://www.finlink.net>

How long have the founders known one another and how did you meet? Have any of the founders not met in person?

:   We met in 2006 so we know each other for 6 years now! We did most of our CS
    assignments together at engineering school by choice. We were partners on
    the student's council of Grenoble INP. During the statistical practical
    work, teams of 3 were picked at random on the whole class (~250), we ended
    up together again! (probability: 0.8%)

Why did you pick this idea to work on? Do you have domain expertise in this area? How do you know people need what you're making?

:   That's a product we and some of our friends are willing to pay for. We asked
    people at ParisHackers and our tech-savvy friends. We all hate the feeling
    of skimming through something and thinking to ourselves "why did I read
    that?". That is even worse if you get offline for a few days and try to get
    back up to date.

    Gabriel has done a Google Summer of Code on Natural Language Processing
    (NLP) on Apertium in 2009, aced the full online courses on NLP and ML by
    Stanford (Coursera), always kept up to date with NLP tools, has been
    designing and implementing Bayesian models for 4 years.

    Etienne is dedicated to robust software. Having worked in security for 4
    years, he's familiar with systems breaking for no apparent reason, backups
    failing to restore and the smell of burnt hard drives. This product will
    probably be challenging to scale up, so his Unix skills will be put to good
    use.

What's new about what you're making? What substitutes do people resort to because it doesn't exist yet (or they don't know about it)?

:   People spend more time looking for the information they care about (news,
    being it social or not). They check their feeds (Twitter and Facebook
    included) or social news sites (HN, Reddit) more often because they fear
    missing new things (information overload) if they check later. For some part
    this is because these websites make their revenue through ads: they want to
    be addictive in order to maximize page views. We want offer them the
    possibility to pay to be ad-free, and in case of ads: we believe strongly
    targeted ads are better than more page views.

Who are your competitors, and who might become competitors? Who do you fear most?

:   - [Prismatic](http://getprismatic.com)
    - [Newsblur](http://newsblur.com)
    - [Google Reader](https://www.google.com/reader/view/)
    - [Zite](http://zite.com/)
    - [FlipBoard](http://flipboard.com/)
    - [Taptu](https://www.taptu.com/)

    We don't really count daily debriefing (e.g. news.me) not "read-it-later"
    (e.g. instapaper) as concurrents, the later really are complementary to what
    we do.

    We fear Prismatic most (because of the people there and because we like the
    product), however, they are topic centric (instead of feed centric, users
    cannot import their RSS) and seem to focus too much on Twitter.

    Newsblur is only for RSS, it is focusing on its own community
    (BlurBlogs/internal community sharing). We think it is hard to be social
    without integrating Facebook nor Twitter.

    Google (Reader and Plus teams) can do it, but it would require including
    Facebook and Twitter, which we don't see happening because of G+.

    Zite works well but it is only for news (newspapers even) and only on iOS
    and Android.

    Flipboard and Taptu include social media but are still limited to mobiles,
    and we do not want to modify/editorialize the content as they do.

What do you understand about your business that other companies in it just don't get?

:   - Often, they don't connect content and social (other existing social that
      is), even Newsblur connects only to Newsblur's users, and Google Reader:
    only to Google products.
    - If they do, they don't differentiate why I follow my girlfriend's Twitter
      and Rich Hickey's Twitter, at least I can't see the difference.
    - In all cases, their goals seems to be to get users to spend _more_ time on
      their website, by seeing more entries. We don't assume that, we just want
    to empower users.

How do or will you make money? How much could you make? (We realize you can't know precisely, but give your best estimate.)

:   We want to have a freemium model. For paying customers, we can provide more
    import formats (open formats will be free for everybody) and an export
    format, more information sources... Also, we will probably charge the heavy
    users of our API.

    We think we can get a significant fraction of Twitter users and RSS users.
    The blooming success of "Google Reader clones" suggests users are willing to
    switch. The success of Instapaper (1 million users on iOS alone) and of
    "digests" services suggest there is a market of power-users. A safe
    guesstimate would be to have 1 million users in one year (from now) and 20
    millions soon after. This is not unrealistic as Flipboard, which exists only
    on mobile devices, has reached 20 million users and 3 billion pageviews in
    August. A classic freemium model yields 1% of paying customers, so 10,000
    users at $15 for the first year and 200,000 users afterwards.

If you've already started working on it, how long have you been working and how many lines of code (if applicable) have you written?

:   We have been working part time for 1 month. So far, we have written approximately 2kloc of Python.

How far along are you? Do you have a beta yet? If not, when will you? Are you launched? If so, how many users do you have? Do you have revenue? If so, how much? If you're launched, what is your monthly growth rate (in users or revenue or both)?

:   So far, we do not have a beta. Gabriel is going to be full-time on it
    starting from November and we will have a MVP next month.

If you have an online demo, what's the url? (Please don't password protect it; just use an obscure url.)

:   Not yet.

How will you get users? If your idea is the type that faces a chicken-and-egg problem in the sense that it won't be attractive to users till it has a lot of users (e.g. a marketplace, a dating site, an ad network), how will you overcome that?

:   We will get users first through word of mouth (HN, Twitter, friends): this
    way we can iterate on the product while developing a core fanbase.

    We don't face a chicken-and-egg problem in terms of users, but for the added
    value to kick in, a user needs to spend some time on the site after signing
    up. For that, we think about doing "users categories": roughly classifying
    all of one user's tastes is quicker than getting their user-level
    personalization right. We can then leverage (weighted sum parameters of)
    existing well-defined user profiles.

    We will lower the barrier to entry: have RSS import formats, integration of
    Twitter and Facebook. We would like to integrate (upvotes!) social news
    sites too (with posts/comments), for Reddit there is an API, the HN API is
    read-only.

If you're already incorporated, when were you? Who are the shareholders and what percent does each own? If you've had funding, how much, at what valuation(s)?

:   Not applicable.

If you're not incorporated yet, please list the percent of the company you plan to give each founder, and anyone else you plan to give stock to. (This question is as much for you as us.)

:   snippyhollow 50
    emillon 50

If we fund you, which of the founders will commit to working exclusively (no school, no other jobs) on this project for the next year?

:   Both of us will work full-time on this project.

For founders who can't, why not? What level of commitment are they willing to make?

:   Not applicable.

Do any founders have other commitments between January and March 2013 inclusive?

:   Etienne may have to defend his PhD in this period. All the technical
    work and the manuscript will be done, so it will not take a lot of time.

Do any founders have commitments in the future (e.g. finishing college, going to grad school), and if so what?

:   No.

Where do you live now, and where would the company be based after YC?

:   We live in Paris, France. We would move to SF/the Valley after YC.

Are any of the founders covered by noncompetes or intellectual property agreements that overlap with your project? Will any be working as employees or consultants for anyone else?

:   No.

Was any of your code written by someone who is not one of your founders? If so, how can you safely use it? (Open source is ok of course.)

:   No.

Are any of the following true? (a) You are the only founder. (b) You are a student who may return to school when the next term starts. (c) Half or more of your group can't move to the Bay Area. (d) One or more founders will keep their current jobs. (e) None of the founders are programmers. (Answering yes doesn't disqualify you. It's just to remind us to check.)

:   No.

If you had any other ideas you considered applying with, please list them. One may be something we've been waiting for. Often when we fund people it's to do something they list here and not in the main application.

:   - Online appointments which respect your calendar and priorities. "Why do I
      have to call to get an appointment with my doctor?"
    - Virtual engineer assistant (as in Iron Man, connecting SolidWorks/Catia
      (CAD modeler, databases search, and simulation) with WolframAlpha-like
    inference).
    - Business Process Management for food making, we particularly think about
      wine and micro-brewing.
    - Monetizing CPU time by selling distributed computing in the browser.

Please tell us something surprising or amusing that one of you has discovered. (The answer need not be related to your project.)

:   If I give you $100 today or $101 tomorrow, you will most likely take the $100 today.

    What if I give you $100 in one year, or $101 in one year and one day?

    Cognitive biases are fun.

### The interview

### The product

Here is what the home looks like

![Cloverfeed inbox, sorted]

and here what it would look if unsorted
for this user

![Cloverfeed inbox, unsorted]

### The future

[Gabriel Synnaeve]: http://snippyhollow.github.io/
[Cloverfeed]: http://cloverfeed.com/
[Hacker News]: http://news.ycombinator.com/
[at YC]: http://ycombinator.com/atyc.html
[Cloverfeed inbox, sorted]: http://i.imgur.com/Q9tVx.png
[Cloverfeed inbox, unsorted]: http://i.imgur.com/uHJda.png
